CDI beta blog post updates (#2427)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-08-04-jakarta-core-profile-22009-beta.adoc

[#cdi]
== CDI 4.0
CDI allows objects to be bound to lifecycle contexts, to be injected, to be associated with interceptors and decorators, and to interact in a loosely coupled fashion by firing and observing events.

> Highlights of CDI 4.0 include support for Build Compatibile Extensions and Observable Container State Events. This update also brings in new Jakarta EE 10 versions of the Jakarta Annotations and Jakarta Interceptors APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Highlights of CDI 4.0 include support for build compatible extensions and observable container state events. This update also brings in new Jakarta EE 10 versions of the Jakarta Annotations and Jakarta Interceptors APIs.
```

> === Build Compatible Extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Build compatible extensions
```

> Previous versions of CDI allowed users to provider Portable Extensions which allowed customisation of CDI application initialization lifecycle. Build Compatible Extensions are intended to make implementing extensions easier and do make them amenable to build-time processing. To implement a Build Compatible Extension, you need to provide an implementation of the `BuildCompatibleExtension` interface, declared via `META-INF/services`. The implementation may provide methods annotated with one of the extension annotations, each of which corresponds to the extension execution phases;

Reviewer 2: or

```suggestion
Previous versions of CDI allowed users to provide Portable Extensions to customise the CDI application initialization lifecycle. These Build Compatible Extensions make implementing extensions amenable to build-time processing. To implement a Build Compatible Extension, provide an implementation of the `BuildCompatibleExtension` interface, declared via `META-INF/services`. The implementation can provide methods annotated with one of the extension annotations, each of which corresponds to the extension execution phases;
```

> Previous versions of CDI allowed users to provider Portable Extensions which allowed customisation of CDI application initialization lifecycle. Build Compatible Extensions are intended to make implementing extensions easier and do make them amenable to build-time processing. To implement a Build Compatible Extension, you need to provide an implementation of the `BuildCompatibleExtension` interface, declared via `META-INF/services`. The implementation may provide methods annotated with one of the extension annotations, each of which corresponds to the extension execution phases;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previous versions of CDI allowed users to provide portable extensions which allowed customisation of CDI application initialization lifecycle. Build compatible extensions are intended to make implementing extensions easier and to make them amenable to build-time processing by simply annotating methods of the implementation with extension annotations.

To implement a build compatible extension, you need to provide an implementation of the `BuildCompatibleExtension` interface, declared in `META-INF/services`. You can then annotate the methods with one of the extension annotations, each of which corresponds to the extension execution phases:
```

- `@Discovery`
- `@Enhancement`
- `@Registration`
- `@Synthesis`
- `@Validation`

> For example, as part of the `Enhancement` phase, this implementation adds an additional `MyQualifier` annotation to the `MyService` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, as part of the `Enhancement` phase, this implementation adds an additional `MyQualifier` annotation to the `MyService` type:
```

[source, java]
----
public class MyExtension implements BuildCompatibleExtension {
    @Enhancement(type=MyService.class)
    public void addMyQualifier(ClassConfig clazz) {
        clazz.addAnnotation(MyQualifier.class)
    }
}
----

> === Startup and Shutdown Events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Startup and Shutdown events
```

> Two new Observable Container State Events are added: Startup and Shutdown. Applications can listen for these events to be notified when the CDI container is starting up and being shut down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two new observable container state events are now available: Startup and Shutdown. Applications can listen for these events to be notified when the CDI container is starting up and being shut down.

For example:
```

[source, java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class MyObserver {
    public void observeStartup(@Observes Startup startupEvent) { {
        System.out.println("CDI Container is starting");
    }

    public void observeShutdown(@Observes Shutdown shutdownEvent) { {
        System.out.println("CDI Container is stopping");
    }
}
----

> The order of multiple observer methods may be controlled using the `@Priority` annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can control the order of multiple observer methods by using the `@Priority` annotation.
```

> The order of multiple observer methods may be controlled using the `@Priority` annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can control the order of multiple observer methods by using the `@Priority` annotation.
```

=== Empty beans.xml files

> In previous versions of CDI, an empty `beans.xml` file indicated that an archive should be treated as an Explicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="all"`). In CDI 4.0, an empty `beans.xml` will now cause an archive to be treated as an Implicit Bean Archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`). Should it be needed, a configuration option has been provided to enable compatibility with previous versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In previous versions of CDI, an empty `beans.xml` file indicated that an archive should be treated as an explicit bean archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="all"`). In CDI 4.0, an empty `beans.xml` now causes an archive to be treated as an implicit bean archive (the equivalent of `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`). If necessary, you can set a configuration option to enable compatibility with previous versions.
```

=== Unversioned beans.xml files

> In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file that did not include a `version` attribute defaulted to `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it defaults to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`. It is recommended that all `beans.xml` files should be properly versioned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file that did not include a `version` attribute defaulted to `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it defaults to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`. However, you should properly version all `beans.xml` files, as shown in the following configuration example:
```

> In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file that did not include a `version` attribute defaulted to mean `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it defaults to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`. It is recommended that all `beans.xml` files should be properly versioned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In previous versions of CDI, a non-empty `beans.xml` file that did not include a `version` attribute defaulted to `bean-discovery-mode="all"`. In CDI 4.0, it defaults to `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`. It is recommended that all `beans.xml` files should be properly versioned.
```

[source, xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<beans xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xmlns="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/jakartaee"
    xsi:schemaLocation="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/jakartaee https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/jakartaee/beans_4_0.xsd"
    version="4.0"
    bean-discovery-mode="annotated">
</beans>
----

> === Programatic lookup of Beans and Instances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Programatic lookup of beans and instances
```

> A new Handle API is added to make programatic inspection of Bean metadata easier, avoiding the need to create instances before they are actually required. `Handles` may be obtained via the `Instance` API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new Handle API is now available to make programatic inspection of Bean metadata easier. This avoids the need to create instances before they are actually required. You can obtain a `Handle` using the Instance API:
```

[source, java]
----
public interface Handle<T> extends AutoCloseable {
        T get();
        Bean<T> getBean();
        void destroy();
        void close();
}
----

=== Removed APIs

The following previously deprecated CDI APIs have been removed:  

> * `@New` qualifier
>   - replaced by `@Dependent` beans

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `@New` qualifier - replaced by `@Dependent` beans.
```

> * `Bean#isNullable()`
>   - has not been used by the implementation since CDI 1.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Bean#isNullable()` - has not been used by the implementation since CDI 1.1.
```

> * `BeanManager#fireEvent()`
>   - Use `BeanManager.getEvent()` instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `BeanManager#fireEvent()` - Use `BeanManager.getEvent()` instead.
```

> * `BeanManager#createInjectionTarget(AnnotatedType)`
>   - replaced by `BeanManager#getInjectionTargetFactory(AnnotatedType)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `BeanManager#createInjectionTarget(AnnotatedType)` - replaced by `BeanManager#getInjectionTargetFactory(AnnotatedType)`
```

* `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType)`

>   - replaced by `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType, String)`

Reviewer: Is there a reason for saying "Use.... instead" in some cases, but "replace by ...." in others? Or could they all be worded as "Use....instead"?

> * `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType)`
>   - replaced by `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType, String)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType)` - replaced by `BeforeBeanDiscovery#addAnnotatedType(AnnotatedType, String)`
```

=== Configuration

> The Liberty `<cdi12>` `server.xml` configuration element has been superseded by a new `<cdi>` element, which applies to CDI versions 1.2 and later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Liberty `<cdi12>` `server.xml` configuration element has been superseded by a new `<cdi>` element, which applies to CDI versions 1.2 and later. For example:
```

> The Liberty `<cdi12>` `server.xml` configuration element has been superseded by a new `<cdi>` element which applies to all versions of CDI (1.2 and newer).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Liberty `<cdi12>` `server.xml` configuration element has been superseded by a new `<cdi>` element, which applies to CDI versions 1.2 and later.
```

[source, xml]
----
<cdi enableImplicitBeanArchives="false" emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility="true"/>
----

* The `enableImplicitBeanArchives` attribute is the same as it was in previous versions.

>   - If set to `true`, which is the default, then archives that do not contain a `beans.xml` file are treated as Implicit Bean Archives and scanned for classes that have Bean Defining Annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If set to `true`, which is the default, then archives that do not contain a `beans.xml` file are treated as implicit bean archives and scanned for classes that have bean defining annotations.
```

  - If set to `false`, then archives that do not contain a `beans.xml` file are not scanned for annotated classes.

* The `emptyBeansXmlCDI3Compatibility` attribute applies only to CDI 4.0.

>   - If set to `true`, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Explicit Bean Archive, as it was in CDI 3.0 and earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If set to `true`, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an explicit bean archive, as it was in CDI 3.0 and earlier.
```

>   - If set to `false`, which is the default, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an Implicit Bean Archive. This is equivalent to setting `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If set to `false`, which is the default, then an archive that contains an empty `beans.xml` file is treated as an implicit bean archive. This is equivalent to setting `bean-discovery-mode="annotated"`.
```

> To use the CDI 4.0 feature, add `cdi-4.0` to your `server.xml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the CDI 4.0 feature, add `cdi-4.0` to your `server.xml`:
```
